---
slug: "2019/03/24/git-playbook"
title: "Git Playbook"
date: 2019-03-24 09:11:01
update: 2025-10-26 11:59:49
type: "reference"
tagline: "Recipes to git things done"
---

This is a collection of Git patterns, workflows, and configurations I've come to rely on over the years. I hope you find them as useful as I have!

:::commend
Drop the `--global` flag to apply the configuration only to a specific Git project.
:::

## Branches

### Set the default branch name

```sh
git config --global init.defaultbranch $branch_name
```

When you run `git init`, Git uses this configuration to create a default branch.

### Create a remote branch on push if it doesn't exist

```sh
git config --global push.autosetupremote true
```

This configuration tells Git to create the current branch on the remote (if it doesn't exist) when you push changes.

## Ignore patterns

### Global ignore file

You can point Git to a global `~/.gitignore` file.

```sh
git config --global core.excludesfile ~/.gitignore
```

This is particularly useful to handle operating system differences. For example, if you add `.DS_Store` to `~/.gitignore` file now, Git will ignore it everywhere.

### Ignore changes on versioned files

To ignore local changes on files already versioned on Git, you can manually update the index.

```sh
git update-index --assume-unchanged $file_path
```

To ignore all files in a directory, list them and ignore them.

```sh
git ls-files -z $directory_path | xargs -0 git update-index --assume-unchanged
```

To stop ignoring the changes, run the same commands with `--no-assume-unchanged` flag.

## Housekeeping

### Remove deleted remote branches

Prune a remote by specifying its name. You can specify several remotes separated by space.

```sh
git remote prune $remote_name
```

Alternatively, you can prune a remote while fetching the updates.

```sh
git fetch --prune $remote_name
git fetch --prune --all
```

You can even configure Git to automatically prune on fetch, so you don't have to.

```sh
git config --global fetch.prune true
git config --global fetch.prunetags true
```

## Configuration

### Switch on autocorrect for Git commands

With the following configuration, Git prompts you with a possible correct command if you mistype a command. If you approve, Git runs the suggested command.

```sh
git config --global help.autocorrect prompt
```

If you prefer Git to automatically run the autocorrected command without prompting, you can set a delay after which the command will run.

```sh
git config --global help.autocorrect 15 # 1.5 seconds
```

### Command aliases

To avoid typing long commands, you can configure short aliases for them under `alias` key of `~/.gitconfig` file.

```ini title="~/.gitconfig"
[alias]
	; list configured aliases
	aliases = config --get-regexp alias

	; amend previous commit with additional changes
	amend = commit --amend --no-edit

	; list branches, remotes, tags
	branches = branch -a
	remotes = remote -v
	tags = tag -l
```

You can set an alias by editing the `~/.gitconfig` file or by running the following command.

```sh
git config --global alias.$alias_name <git_function>
```

Use quotes if the alias includes more than one function.

### Repository URL aliases

You can also alias repository URLs. For example, if you prefer to use SSH, you can translate HTTPS links using [`insteadOf`](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-config#Documentation/git-config.txt-urlbaseinsteadOf) conditional.

```sh
git config --global url.git@github.com:org/.insteadOf https://github.com/org/
```

With this configuration, if you clone a repository with `git clone https://github.com/org/repo.git`, it'll appear in `git remote -v` as

```sh
origin    git@github.com:org/repository.git (fetch)
origin    git@github.com:org/repository.git (push)
```

### Host-specific configuration

If you're working with different Git hosts, you can use [host-specific configuration](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-config#Documentation/git-config.txt-hasconfigremoteurl) to seamlessly switch between them.

First, add a redirect to another Git configuration in your global `~/.gitconfig` file. If you're working with HTTPS and SSH, you should add redirects for both URL schemes.

```sh
git config --global includeif.hasconfig:remote.*.url:git@codeberg.org:*/**.path ~/.gitconfig.codeberg
git config --global includeif.hasconfig:remote.*.url:https://codeberg.org/**.path ~/.gitconfig.codeberg
```

If you configure different email addresses in these `.gitconfig` files, running `git config --list --show-origin` in the directory where you've both configurations active should show the difference.

```sh
...
file:~/.gitconfig           user.email=example@users.noreply.github.com
file:~/.gitconfig.codeberg  user.email=example@noreply.codeberg.org
...
```

:::warn
Some Git clients may not detect host-specific configuration automatically.
:::

---

## Radar

:::commend{title='Adopt'}
- [Host-specific configuration](#host-specific-configuration)
- [Repository URL Aliases](#repository-url-aliases)
:::

**Related**

- [Git Reference](https://git-scm.com/docs)
