---
slug: "2023/04/16/my-mac-setup--1"
title: "My Mac Setup"
description: "Setting up a fresh macOS install is a great chance to optimize your system and make it truly yours. This is a setup that I've perfected for my needs."
date: 2023-04-16 12:42:10
update: 2024-07-01 00:17:21
type: "reference"
state: "archived"
---

:::warn{title="Archived post"}
This post covers my setup for **macOS Sonoma 14**. Please consult [the updated version of this post](/post/2023/04/16/my-mac-setup/), which lists my current preferences.
:::

## First steps

- **Enable Tap to click** [System Settings > Trackpad > Point & Click > switch on _Tap to click_]
- **Disable Natural scrolling** [System Settings > Trackpad > Scroll & Zoom > switch off _Natural scrolling_]
- **Scale the display for larger text** [System Settings > Displays > select _Large text_]
- **Enable three-finger drag on trackpad** [System Settings > Accessibility > Pointer Control > Trackpad Options > switch on _Use trackpad for dragging_, and set _Dragging style_ to _Three-Finger Drag_]
- **Always display scrollbars** [System Settings > Appearance > set _Show scroll bars_ to _Always_]
- **Use keyboard navigation to focus on controls** [System Settings > Keyboard > switch on _Keyboard navigation_]

## Install apps with homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh) requires Git. Install **XCode Command Line tools** to install Git packaged for Apple Silicon.

```zsh
xcode-select --install
```

Install homebrew with

```zsh
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Import apps using the following [Brewfile](https://docs.brew.sh/Manpage#bundle-subcommand) with `brew bundle install`.

```zsh
tap "alienator88/cask"
tap "homebrew/bundle"
tap "homebrew/cask-versions"
brew "aria2"
brew "awscli"
brew "bat"
brew "node"
brew "corepack"
brew "d2"
brew "eza"
brew "ffmpeg"
brew "git-delta"
brew "jq"
brew "maven"
brew "nushell"
brew "pyenv"
brew "scrcpy"
brew "starship"
brew "vale"
brew "yt-dlp"
cask "affinity-designer"
cask "affinity-photo"
cask "android-file-transfer"
cask "android-platform-tools"
cask "audacity"
cask "calibre"
cask "cog"
cask "fork"
cask "git-credential-manager"
cask "google-chrome"
cask "iina"
cask "intellij-idea"
cask "iterm2"
cask "keka"
cask "kid3"
cask "maccy"
cask "megasync"
cask "mkvtoolnix"
cask "obsidian"
cask "orbstack"
cask "pearcleaner"
cask "pika"
cask "rectangle"
cask "visual-studio-code"
cask "zulu"
cask "zulu@17"
cask "zulu@21"
```

### Disable telemetry and auto updates

Add the following environment variables in the `~/.zshrc` file.

```zsh
# turns off homebrew telemetry
export HOMEBREW_NO_ANALYTICS=1
# turns off homebrew auto-update
export HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE=1
```

For nushell, add them in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
$env.HOMEBREW_NO_ANALYTICS = "1"
$env.HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE = "1"
```

### Add homebrew binaries on PATH

Add the `/opt/homebrew/bin` location on `PATH` in the `~/.zshrc` file as follows.

```zsh
export PATH=/opt/homebrew/bin:$PATH
```

For nushell, update the path in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
let paths = [
		"/opt/homebrew/bin"
]
$env.PATH = ([$paths, ($env.PATH | split row (char esep))] | flatten)
```

## Install apps and fonts from elsewhere

- [Reeder](https://apps.apple.com/in/app/reeder-5/id1529448980)
- [Yomu EBook Reader](https://apps.apple.com/in/app/yomu-ebook-reader/id562211012)
- [Topaz Photo AI](https://www.topazlabs.com/downloads)
- [JetBrains Mono](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsMono)
- [Inter](https://github.com/rsms/inter)

## System tweaks

- Set Firefox as the default browser. Use Chrome and Safari for cross-browser testing.
- Configure an iTerm profile for nushell with custom shell pointing to `/opt/homebrew/bin/nu`. Set it as the default profile.
- [Change default screenshot location](/post/2023/11/25/customizing-default-screenshot-location-on-macos/)

### iCloud settings

:::note
I don't use iCloud for file storage, and the following settings are geared toward this preference.
:::

- **Switch off iCloud Drive and Photos sync** [System Settings > Apple ID > iCloud > under _Apps using iCloud_ switch off _Photos_ and _iCloud Drive_]
- **Switch off Mac storage optimization** [System Settings > Apple ID > iCloud > switch off _Optimize Mac Storage_]

### Dock settings

- **Disable autohiding** [System Settings > Desktop & Dock > switch off _Automatically hide and show the Dock_]
- Pin Finder, Launchpad, iTerm2, Firefox, VSCode and Obsidian on the dock. Remove everything else.

### System settings

- **Always prefer tabs over new windows** [System Settings > Desktop & Dock > Windows > select _Always_ under _Prefer tabs when opening documents_]
- **Jump to scrollbar adjacent location** [System Settings > Appearance > set _Click in the scroll bar to_ to _Jump to the spot that's clicked_]
- **Disable sound effects** [System Settings > Sound > switch off _Play sound on startup_, _Play user interface sound effects_, and _Play feedback when volume is changed_]
- **Disable Ask Siri** [System Settings > Siri & Spotlight > switch off _Ask Siri_]
- **Disable Spotlight suggestions** [System Settings > Siri & Spotlight > Spotlight > _Search results_ (uncheck Contacts, Events & Reminders, Mail & Messages, and Siri Suggestions)]
- [Remap F4 and F5 keys to adjust keyboard brightness](/post/2023/05/09/remap-function-keys-to-adjust-keyboard-brightness-on-macos/)

### Finder settings

- **Show file extensions** [Finder > Settings > Advanced > check _Show all file extensions_]
- **Perform search in the current folder** [Finder > Settings > Advanced > under _When performing a search_ select _Search the Current folder_]
- **Open new windows as tabs** [Finder > Settings > General > check _Open folders in tabs instead of new windows_]
- Hide useless sidebar items
- Show Path Bar for easier navigation [enable with <kbd>Option + Command + B</kbd>]
- Show Status Bar for folder info [enable with <kbd>Command + /</kbd>]
- **Always show hidden files**
  
	```zsh
	defaults write com.apple.finder AppleShowAllFiles YES
	```
- **Keep folders on top** [Finder > Settings > Advanced > under _Keep folders on top_ select _In windows when sorting by name_]

### Safari settings

- **Enable Developer tools** [Safari > Settings > Advanced > check _Show features for web developers_]

## Development environment

### Set `JAVA_HOME`

Homebrew does not initialize the `JAVA_HOME` variable after installing a JDK (Java Development Kit). Tools, such as Maven, will not detect your JDK of choice until you set `JAVA_HOME`.

For zsh, add the following environment variable in the `.zshrc` file.

```zsh
# this sets JAVA_HOME for JDK 21 (Termurin distribution)
export JAVA_HOME=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/temurin-21.jdk/Contents/Home
```

For nushell, add it in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
$env.JAVA_HOME = "/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/zulu-22.jdk/Contents/Home"
```

### iTerm settings

- **Set appearance to compact** [iTerm2 > Preferences > Appearance > General > under _Theme_ select _Compact_]
- **Set the new tabs and split panes to open in the existing session's directory** [iTerm2 > Preferences > Profiles > General > under _Working directory_ select _Advanced configuration_. Hit _edit_, select _Reuse previous session's directory_ for _Working Directory for New Tabs_ and _Working Directory for New Split Panes_]
- **Enable paste on right click** [iTerm2 > Preferences > Pointer > Bindings > copy _Paste from clipboard_ binding and change _Button/Gesture_ to _Right Button_]
- **Disable the offscreen command line** [iTerm2 > Preferences > Profiles > Terminal > under _Shell integration_ uncheck _Show offscreen command line at top of session_]

:::assert{title="Restore iTerm settings from Time Machine"}
Restore the iTerm settings by copying the `~/Library/Application Support/iTerm2` directory, and `~/Library/Preferences/com.googlecode.iterm2.plist` file from Time Machine backup.
:::

### Install `pnpm`

Install [`pnpm`](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm) with corepack.

```zsh
corepack prepare pnpm@latest --activate
```

Install [`svgo`](https://github.com/svg/svgo) and [`optimizt`](https://github.com/343dev/optimizt) with `pnpm`
```zsh
pnpm add -g svgo
pnpm add -g @343dev/optimizt
```

Add `~/Library/pnpm` to the `PATH` to access these tools on zsh and nushell.

For zsh, update the `PATH` in the `.zshrc` file as follows.

```zsh {1}
export PNPM_HOME="~/Library/pnpm"
export PATH=/opt/homebrew/bin:$PNPM_HOME:$PATH
```

For nushell, update the `PATH` in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu {1,4}
$env.PNPM_HOME = "~/Library/pnpm"
let paths = [
		"/opt/homebrew/bin",
		$env.PNPM_HOME
]
```
