---
slug: "2023/04/16/my-mac-setup"
title: "My Mac Setup"
date: 2023-04-16 12:42:10
update: 2026-04-18 22:31:56
type: "reference"
---

This is my personal setup for **macOS Sequoia 15**. If something feels opinionated, it probably is.

## First steps

Open **System Settings** and apply the following changes.

- TrackPad [Point & Click] > set **Tap to click: ON**
- Trackpad [Scroll & Zoom] > set **Natural scrolling: OFF**
- Displays > select resolution smaller than *Default*. This trades pixel density for larger text.
- Accessibility > Pointer Control > Trackpad Options > set **Use trackpad for dragging: ON** and **Dragging style: Three-Finger Drag**
- Appearance > set **Show scroll bars: Always**
- Keyboard > set **Keyboard navigation: ON** to move focus between controls using keyboard.

## Install apps with Homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh) is my preferred package manager on macOS. It needs Git to work, and the easiest way to get Git on Apple Silicon is to install **Xcode Command Line Tools**.

```zsh
xcode-select --install
```

Then install Homebrew itself.

```zsh
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Import apps using the following [Brewfile](https://docs.brew.sh/Manpage#bundle-subcommand) with `brew bundle install`.

```brewfile
brew "aria2"
brew "awscli"
brew "bat"
brew "d2"
brew "duckdb"
brew "eza"
brew "ffmpeg"
brew "git-delta"
brew "iina"
brew "imagemagick"
brew "jq"
brew "maven"
brew "node"
brew "nushell"
brew "pnpm"
brew "starship"
brew "uv"
brew "vale"
brew "yt-dlp"
brew "zoxide"
cask "adguard"
cask "affinity-designer"
cask "affinity-photo"
cask "android-file-transfer"
cask "android-platform-tools"
cask "calibre"
cask "clop"
cask "cog-app"
cask "firefox"
cask "fork"
cask "glyphs"
cask "keka"
cask "kekaexternalhelper"
cask "kid3"
cask "localsend"
cask "maccy"
cask "megasync"
cask "mkvtoolnix-app"
cask "obsidian"
cask "orbstack"
cask "pearcleaner"
cask "pika"
cask "visual-studio-code"
cask "zulu"
cask "zulu@21"
cask "zulu@25"
```

### Disable telemetry and auto updates

Homebrew phones home with usage data. It also attempts to learn newer versions of formulae, which can slow things down during updates. Disable both by [configuring](/post/2024/12/29/setting-up-environment-variables-on-macos/#setting-up-the-environment-variables) `HOMEBREW_NO_ANALYTICS=1` and `HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE=1` environment variables.

### Add Homebrew binaries to `PATH`

Homebrew binaries live in `/opt/homebrew/bin`. To let your shell know about them, [put this location on the `PATH`](/post/2024/12/29/setting-up-environment-variables-on-macos/#configuring-the-path).

## Install apps and fonts from elsewhere

- [Supercharge](https://sindresorhus.com/supercharge) - power tools for macOS
- [Things](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/things-3/id904280696) - my favorite task manager
- [Pixelmator Pro](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/pixelmator-pro/id1289583905) - my preferred photo and video editor
- [Yomu EBook Reader](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/yomu-ebook-reader/id562211012) - ebook reader
- [IntelliJ IDEA](https://github.com/JetBrains/intellij-community/releases) - Java IDE
- [JetBrains Mono](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsMono) - monospace font for code editors and terminal
- [Inter](https://github.com/rsms/inter) - workhorse sans-serif for everything else

## System tweaks

Open **System Settings**, again, and apply the following changes.

- Desktop & Dock > set **Default web browser: Firefox**
- Desktop & Dock > set **Tiled windows have margins: OFF**
- Desktop & Dock > set **Prefer tabs when opening documents: Always**
- [Remap F4 and F5 keys to adjust keyboard brightness](/post/2023/05/09/remap-function-keys-to-adjust-keyboard-brightness-on-macos/)
- Appearance > set **Click in the scroll bar to: Jump to the spot that's clicked**
- Sound > set **Play sound on startup: OFF**, **Play user interface sound effects: OFF**, and **Play feedback when volume is changed: OFF**
- Apple Intelligence & Siri > set **Siri: OFF**
- Spotlight > under Search results, uncheck Contacts, Mail & Messages, and Siri Suggestions
- [Change default screenshot location](/post/2023/11/25/customizing-default-screenshot-location-on-macos/)
- Desktop & Dock > Hot Corners. Unset all hot corners.
- Desktop & Dock > set **Group windows by application: OFF**

### Dock settings

- System Settings > Desktop & Dock > set **Automatically hide and show the Dock: OFF**
- Default Dock icons are too large for my taste, so I usually set them smaller.
  
  ```sh
  defaults write com.apple.dock "tilesize" -int "36" && killall Dock
  ```
	
	You can reset this with `defaults delete com.apple.dock "tilesize" && killall Dock`
- Right click Downloads icon > set **View content as: List**
- Remove all apps from Dock except the frequently used ones, such as Terminal, Firefox, Obsidian, Things, and Visual Studio Code.

### Finder settings

- Settings > Advanced > check **Show all filename extensions**
- Settings > Advanced > set **When performing a search: Search the Current Folder**
- Settings > Advanced > Keep folders on top > check **In windows when sorting by name**
- Settings > General > check **Open folders in tabs instead of new windows**
- Settings > General > set **New Finder windows show: Downloads**
- Press <kbd>Option</kbd> <kbd>Command</kbd> <kbd>P</kbd>, or View > select **Show Path Bar**
- Press <kbd>Command</kbd> <kbd>/</kbd>, or View > select **Show Status Bar**
- Press <kbd>Shift</kbd> <kbd>Command</kbd> <kbd>T</kbd>, or View > select **Show Tab Bar**
- Always show hidden files
	
	```sh
	defaults write com.apple.finder AppleShowAllFiles YES
	```
- Set list view as default
	
	```sh
	defaults write com.apple.finder "FXPreferredViewStyle" -string "Nlsv" && killall Finder
	```
	
	You can reset this with `defaults delete com.apple.finder "FXPreferredViewStyle" && killall Finder`

### Menu Bar settings

- Reduce the gap between Menu Bar icons.
	
	```sh
	defaults -currentHost write -globalDomain NSStatusItemSpacing -int 8
	```
  
	You can reset this with `defaults -currentHost delete -globalDomain NSStatusItemSpacing && killall SystemUIServer`

### Safari settings

- Settings > Advanced > check **Show features for web developers** at the very bottom

## Development environment

### Set `JAVA_HOME`

Homebrew does not automatically configure the `JAVA_HOME` variable after installing a JDK (Java Development Kit). The installed JDK is typically located at:

```txt
/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/<distribution>-<version>.jdk/Contents/Home
```

Tools, such as Maven, rely on `JAVA_HOME` to locate the JDK. [Configure](/post/2024/12/29/setting-up-environment-variables-on-macos/#setting-up-the-environment-variables) this environment variable manually.

### Terminal settings

I backup and restore `~/Library/Preferences/com.apple.Terminal.plist` to carry over the macOS Terminal settings, which include the following changes.

- I use [Nushell](https://www.nushell.sh/) most of the time, so it is set as Default profile, with `/opt/homebrew/bin/nu` as the start command.
- I've an identical profile for `zsh` for occasional times I need it. Same goes for `jshell` when I want to quickly experiment with the Java standard library.
- Settings > General > **New windows open with Default Profile in Default Working Directory**
- Settings > General > **New tabs open with Same Profile in Same Working Directory**

### Install global CLI tools with `pnpm`

For optimizing vector graphics, I use [`svgo`](https://github.com/svg/svgo) installed globally with [`pnpm`](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm).

```sh
pnpm add -g svgo
```

`pnpm` installs global dependencies at `~/Library/pnpm`. Add it to the `PATH` to access them through shell.

---

**Previous versions**

- [:time[2024-07-01 00:17:21]](/archive/2023/04/16/my-mac-setup--1): macOS Sonoma 14 setup
