---
slug: "2023/04/16/my-mac-setup"
title: "My Mac Setup"
description: "Setting up a fresh macOS install is a great chance to optimize your system and make it truly yours. This is a setup that I've perfected for my needs."
date: 2023-04-16 12:42:10
update: 2024-10-27 21:36:47
type: "reference"
---

This is a tailored setup reference for **macOS Sequoia 15** that reflects my current preferences. I will update it as macOS evolves and my requirements change.

## First steps

-	**Switch on tap to click**  
	System Settings > TrackPad > Point & Click > switch on _Tap to click_
-	**Switch off Natural scrolling**  
	System Settings > Trackpad > Scroll & Zoom > switch on _Natural scrolling_
-	**Scale display for larger text**  
	System Settings > Displays > select resolution smaller than _Default_
-	**Switch on Three-finger drag**  
	System Settings > Accessibility > Pointer Control > Trackpad Options > switch on _Use trackpad for dragging_, and set _Dragging style_ to _Three-Finger Drag_
-	**Always display scrollbars**  
	System Settings > Appearance > set _Show scroll bars_ to _Always_
-	**Use keyboard navigation to focus on controls**  
	System Settings > Keyboard > switch on _Keyboard navigation_

## Install apps with Homebrew

[Homebrew](https://brew.sh) requires Git. Install **XCode Command Line tools** to install Git packaged for Apple Silicon.

```zsh
xcode-select --install
```

Install Homebrew.

```zsh
/bin/bash -c "$(curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Homebrew/install/HEAD/install.sh)"
```

Import apps using the following [Brewfile](https://docs.brew.sh/Manpage#bundle-subcommand) with `brew bundle install`.

```brewfile
tap "homebrew/bundle"
brew "aria2"
brew "awscli"
brew "bat"
brew "node"
brew "corepack"
brew "d2"
brew "eza"
brew "ffmpeg"
brew "git-delta"
brew "jq"
brew "maven"
brew "nushell"
brew "starship"
brew "vale"
brew "yt-dlp"
cask "adguard"
cask "affinity-designer"
cask "affinity-photo"
cask "android-file-transfer"
cask "android-platform-tools"
cask "calibre"
cask "cog"
cask "firefox"
cask "fork"
cask "git-credential-manager"
cask "iina"
cask "intellij-idea"
cask "iterm2"
cask "keka"
cask "kid3"
cask "maccy"
cask "megasync"
cask "mkvtoolnix"
cask "obsidian"
cask "orbstack"
cask "pearcleaner"
cask "pika"
cask "visual-studio-code"
cask "zulu"
cask "zulu@17"
cask "zulu@21"
```

### Disable telemetry and auto updates

Add the following environment variables in the `~/.zshrc` file.

```zsh
# turns off homebrew telemetry
export HOMEBREW_NO_ANALYTICS=1
# turns off homebrew auto-update
export HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE=1
```

For Nushell, add them in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
$env.HOMEBREW_NO_ANALYTICS = "1"
$env.HOMEBREW_NO_AUTO_UPDATE = "1"
```

### Add homebrew binaries on PATH

Add the `/opt/homebrew/bin` location on `PATH` in the `~/.zshrc` file as follows.

```zsh
export PATH=/opt/homebrew/bin:$PATH
```

For Nushell, update the path in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
let paths = [
		"/opt/homebrew/bin"
]
$env.PATH = ([$paths, ($env.PATH | split row (char esep))] | flatten)
```

## Install apps and fonts from elsewhere

- [Reeder Classic](https://apps.apple.com/in/app/reeder-classic/id1529448980?mt=12)
- [Yomu EBook Reader](https://apps.apple.com/in/app/yomu-ebook-reader/id562211012)
- [Rippple](https://apps.apple.com/in/app/rippple-for-trakt/id1309894528)
- [JetBrains Mono](https://github.com/JetBrains/JetBrainsMono)
- [Inter](https://github.com/rsms/inter)

## System tweaks

-	**Set Firefox as the default browser**  
	System Settings > Desktop & Dock > set _Default web browser_ to _Firefox_
-	**Remove margins between tiled windows**  
	System Settings > Desktop & Dock > switch off _Tiled windows have margins_
-	**Prefer tabs over new windows**  
	System Settings > Desktop & Dock > set _Prefer tabs when opening documents_ to _Always_
-	**[Remap F4 and F5 keys to adjust keyboard brightness](/post/2023/05/09/remap-function-keys-to-adjust-keyboard-brightness-on-macos/)**
-	**Jump to scrollbar adjacent location**  
	System Settings > Appearance > set _Click in the scroll bar to_ to _Jump to the spot that's clicked_
-	**Switch off sound effects**  
	System Settings > Sound > switch off _Play sound on startup_, _Play user interface sound effects_, and _Play feedback when volume is changed_
-	**Switch off Siri**  
	System Settings > Siri > switch off _Siri_
-	**Switch off useless Spotlight suggestions**  
	System Settings > Spotlight > Search results (uncheck Contacts, Events & Reminders, Mail & Messages, and Siri Suggestions)
-	**[Change default screenshot location](/post/2023/11/25/customizing-default-screenshot-location-on-macos/)**

### iCloud settings

:::note
I don't use iCloud for file storage, and the following settings are geared toward this preference.
:::

-	**Switch off iCloud Drive and Photos sync**  
	System Settings > Apple ID > iCloud > switch off the sync for Photos, iCloud Drive, Notes, Stocks, Home, Wallet, Siri, Freeform, and Maps.

### Dock settings

-	**Switch off autohiding**  
	System Settings > Desktop & Dock > switch off _Automatically hide and show the Dock_
-	**Set smaller icon size**  
	```sh
	defaults write com.apple.dock "tilesize" -int "36" && killall Dock
	```
	> You can reset this with `defaults delete com.apple.dock "tilesize" && killall Dock`.
-	**View downloads as list**  
	Right click Downloads icon > under _View content as_ select _List_
-	**Remove useless pinned apps**  
	Keep Finder, Launchpad, iTerm, Firefox, VSCode and Obsidian on the dock. Remove everything else.

### Finder settings

-	**Show file extensions**  
	Settings > Advanced > check _Show all filename extensions_
-	**Perform search in the current folder**  
	Settings > Advanced > set _When performing a search_ to _Search the Current Folder_
-	**Open new windows as tabs**  
	Settings > General > check _Open folders in tabs instead of new windows_
-	**Open new Finder windows in Downloads folder**  
	Settings > General > set _New Finder windows show_ to _Downloads_
-	**Show Path Bar**  
	Press `Option + Command + P`, or View > select _Show Path Bar_
-	**Show Status Bar**  
	Press `Command + /`, or View > select _Show Status Bar_
-	**Show Tab Bar**  
	Press `Shift + Command + T`, or View > select _Show Tab Bar_
-	**Always show hidden files**  
	```sh
	defaults write com.apple.finder AppleShowAllFiles YES
	```
-	**Keep folders on top**  
	Settings > Advanced > set _Keep folders on top_ to _In windows when sorting by name_
-	**Set list view as default**  
	```sh
	defaults write com.apple.finder "FXPreferredViewStyle" -string "Nlsv" && killall Finder
	```
	> You can reset this with `defaults delete com.apple.finder "FXPreferredViewStyle" && killall Finder`

### Safari settings

-	**Enable Developer tools**  
	Settings > Advanced > check _Show features for web developers_

## Development environment

### Set `JAVA_HOME`

Homebrew does not initialize the `JAVA_HOME` variable after installing a JDK (Java Development Kit). Tools, such as Maven, will not detect your JDK of choice until you set `JAVA_HOME`.

For zsh, add the following environment variable in the `.zshrc` file.

```zsh
# this sets JAVA_HOME for JDK 21 (Termurin distribution)
export JAVA_HOME=/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/temurin-21.jdk/Contents/Home
```

For Nushell, add it in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu
$env.JAVA_HOME = "/Library/Java/JavaVirtualMachines/zulu-22.jdk/Contents/Home"
```

### iTerm settings

-	**Configure Nushell on default profile**  
	On default profile, use Nushell with custom shell pointing to `/opt/homebrew/bin/nu`
-	**Set appearance to compact**  
	Settings > Appearance > General > set _Theme_ to _Compact_
-	**Set the new tabs and split panes to open in the existing session's directory**  
	Settings > Profiles > General > under _Working directory_ select _Advanced configuration_. Hit _edit_, select _Reuse previous session's directory_ for _Working Directory for New Tabs_ and _Working Directory for New Split Panes_
-	**Enable paste on right click**  
	Settings > Pointer > Bindings > copy _Paste from clipboard_ binding and change _Button/Gesture_ to _Right Button_
-	**Disable the offscreen command line**  
	Settings > Profiles > Terminal > under _Shell integration_ uncheck _Show offscreen command line at top of session_

:::assert{title="Restore iTerm settings from Time Machine"}
Restore the iTerm settings by copying the `~/Library/Application Support/iTerm2` directory, and `~/Library/Preferences/com.googlecode.iterm2.plist` file from Time Machine backup.
:::

### Install `pnpm`

Install [`pnpm`](https://github.com/pnpm/pnpm) with corepack.

```zsh
corepack prepare pnpm@latest --activate
```

Install [`svgo`](https://github.com/svg/svgo) and [`optimizt`](https://github.com/343dev/optimizt) with `pnpm`
```zsh
pnpm add -g svgo
pnpm add -g @343dev/optimizt
```

Add `~/Library/pnpm` to the `PATH` to access these tools on zsh and nushell.

For zsh, update the `PATH` in the `.zshrc` file as follows.

```zsh ins{1}
export PNPM_HOME="~/Library/pnpm"
export PATH=/opt/homebrew/bin:$PNPM_HOME:$PATH
```

For Nushell, update the `PATH` in the `~/Library/Application Support/nushell/env.nu` file.

```nu ins{1,4}
$env.PNPM_HOME = "~/Library/pnpm"
let paths = [
		"/opt/homebrew/bin",
		$env.PNPM_HOME
]
```

---

**Previous versions**

- [:time[2024-07-01 00:17:21]](/archive/2023/04/16/my-mac-setup--1): macOS Sonoma 14 setup
