---
slug: "2019/03/24/git-playbook"
title: "Git Playbook"
description: "A collection of useful Git patterns, workflows and configurations"
date: 2019-03-24 09:11:01
update: 2024-10-05 20:16:22
type: "reference"
tagline: "Recipes to git things done"
---

This is a growing reference for Git patterns, workflows, and configurations gathered over the years. I hope you find them as helpful as I have!

## Branches

### Create a remote branch on push if it doesn't exist

```sh
git config --global push.autosetupremote true
```

This configuration tells Git to create the current branch on the remote (if it doesn't exist) when you push changes.

## Ignore patterns

### Ignore `.DS_Store` files system-wide

Add `.DS_Store` to `~/.gitignore` file. Point Git to this file by adding the following lines in `~/.gitconfig` file.
	
```ini {title="Configure global .gitignore file"}
[core]
	excludesFile = ~/.gitignore
```

### Ignore changes on versioned files

To ignore local changes on files already versioned on Git, you can manually update the index.

```sh
git update-index --assume-unchanged <file_path>
```

To ignore all files in a directory, list them and ignore them.

```sh
git ls-files -z <directory_path> | xargs -0 git update-index --assume-unchanged
```

To stop ignoring the changes, run the same commands with `--no-assume-unchanged` flag.

## Housekeeping

### Remove deleted remote branches

Prune a remote by specifying its name. You can specify several remotes separated by space.

```sh
git remote prune <remote_name>
```

Alternatively, you can prune a remote while fetching the updates.

```sh
git fetch --prune <remote_name>
git fetch --prune --all
```

You can even configure Git to automatically prune on fetch, so you don't have to.

```sh
git config --global fetch.prune true
git config --global fetch.prunetags true
```

## Configuration

> Remove the `--global` flag to apply the configuration only to a specific Git project.

### Switch on autocorrect for Git commands

With the following configuration, Git prompts you with a possible correct command if you mistype a command. If you approve, Git runs the suggested command.

```sh
git config --global help.autocorrect prompt
```

If you prefer Git to automatically run the autocorrected command without prompting, you can set a delay after which the command will run.

```sh
git config --global help.autocorrect 15
```

### Create aliases

To avoid typing long commands, you can configure short aliases for them under `alias` key of `~/.gitconfig` file.

```ini title="~/.gitconfig"
[alias]
	aliases = config --get-regexp alias
	amend = commit --amend --no-edit
	branches = branch -a
	remotes = remote -v
	tags = tag -l
```

You can set an alias by editing the `~/.gitconfig` file or by running the following command.

```sh
git config --global alias.<alias_name> <git_function>
```

Use quotes if the alias includes more than one function.

---

**Related**

- [Git Reference](https://git-scm.com/docs)
